 In 2016, Modern Orthodox Jews were more or less solidly behind Hilary Clinton. A sea change occurred by 2024 when most Modern Orthodox Jews had voted Trump into office. The October 7 massacre and Israel’s counter-offensive, which has heavily criticized by Democratic candidate Kamala Harris, was a major incentive to switch party loyalty among the Modern Orthodox Jews, which followed the more religious Orthodox constituencies who were staunchly supportive of Trump.

 Jeremy W. Peters, “Ivanka Trump’s Rabbi Pulls Out of Appearing at Republican Convention,” New York Times, July 15, 2016.

 Amy Neustein, “The Real Reason Rabbi Lookstein Retreated From the RNC,” Letter to the Editor, the Forward, July 19, 2016.

 Give definition of lookback and change of age of first filing a claim – cite NYT or another authoritative paper. Jewish Telegraphic Agency (JTA) reporters Asaf Shalev and Ella Rockart wrote a blistering expose titled “NY Jewish Institutions hit with 150 child sex abuse lawsuits since 2019.” The story was picked up by The Times of Israel, August 30, 2021; “At least 150 sex abuse lawsuits filed against NY Jewish Institutions,” Jerusalem Post, Augst 31, 2021. Most notably, certain institutions were hit with multiple lawsuits, such as Yeshiva University and the Ohel Children’s Home and Family Services, a prominent foster care agency in Brooklyn. Give TOI citation from September 2021, and give a citation from NYT regarding Yeshiva University.  

 Amended Complaint, Index No. 950111/2019, p. 4.

 who was posthumously bestowed the “Talmud Chacham Ha’dor Award” (Hebrew for Talmudic Sage of his Generation Ponenvizt yeshiva, give cite from my eulogy in JP and the write up in Yated Ne’eman

 Noah Sheidlower, “Top Ten Secrets of Brighton Beach, Brooklyn,” untapped new york (Digital Magazine), December 7, 2021. See Wikipedia page: Jewish Center of Brighton Beach - Wikipedia. My father’s synagogue would achieve fame in another regard. In 2013, Village Voice reporter Albert Samaha (now at The Washington Post) wrote an exposé on extortionist tactics of Mendel Epstein, a Brooklyn rabbi, pretending to help women get a Jewish divorce, whose crimes of extortion, kidnapping, and extreme torture landed him in federal prison. See “Bad Rabbi: Tales of Extortion and Torture Depict a Divorce Broker’s Brutal Grip on the Orthodox Community,” Village Voice, December 4, 2013. My father was portrayed in that article for his courageous efforts to help divorced women, many of whom nearly fell prey to the extortionist practices of Epstein. The Voice reported: “Rabbi Neustein ran a sort of Underground Railroad for abused women in the community…. So two or three times a week, Neustein’s father drove the women to the Jewish Center’s bais medrash, the prayer room where he taught, and they told her their stories: of domestic violence, of crumbling marriages, of get refusals.” It was in this same room, the bais medrash of my father’s synagogue (in addition to the main sanctuary) where Nicolas Cage starred in the 2005 crime drama film Lord of War.

 Celia W. Dugger, “As Mother Killed Her Son, Protectors Observed Privacy,” New York Times, February 10, 1992, pg. 1, B10. Interestingly, the mother was not identified in the newspapers as “psychotic.” There were reports by neighbors of domestic violence. The spacing of the children were so close in age that the mother had no time to heal between pregnancies. And at the time she killed her son, she was having a very difficult pregnancy and had a bruised leg and was limping, possibly from domestic abuse. The father was described in the press as “slow” and the family lived at or below the poverty line. There was little hope for improvement because in ultra-Orthodox communities the common deprivation of secular education precludes a woman from earning an income sufficient to leave a marriage plagued by strife. Besides, divorce is severely looked down upon and carries a social stigma rendering a divorced woman in such circles a pariah. Sadly, under pressure to preserve the community’s image of a stable homelife, battered women in religious communities may implode – and their children become the casualties.

 Clara Hemphill, “A Tradition of Silence Hides Family Violence,” by Clara Hemphill, New York Newsday, November 19, 1990, pp. 2, 35.

 Clara Hemphill, “The Agony of Yacov Riegler: Bureaucracy fails to save Brooklyn boy,” New York Newsday,                   December 16, 1990, pp. 6, 22-23. (quote from page 23). 

 Id.

 In fact, a congregant at my father’s synagogue, who was visiting his relative in Mill Basin for the Sabbath, came back to report to my father that the Rabbi of the Flatbush Park Jewish Center, David S. Halpern (now deceased), injected my name into the Sabbath sermon, warning his parishioners to “immediately turn off” their television set if they should see me on the air discussing child abuse in the Orthodox community.

 Give citations to articles

 Passed in January 2019 and signed into law on February 14, 2019, New York’s Child Victims Act (CVA) was a defining piece of legislation that ended decades of impunity for perpetrators.  The reason is that it fundamentally changed legal recourse for incest and child sexual abuse survivors by significantly extending the statute of limitations for civil lawsuits. Specifically, the CVA (Senate Bill S2440) enacted the following changes: 1. Civil lawsuits for child sexual abuse can now be filed until the survivor turns 55, as opposed to age 23 which had been the cutoff point for filing a civil action under the prior statute of limitations. (Under the CVA, the statute of limitations was extended five years from age 23 to age 28 for felony criminal cases.) 2. The 2019 law initially opened a one-year lookback window (from August 14, 2019 to August 14, 2020) for anyone whose lawsuit claim had been summarily dismissed because of the previous statute of limitations which had been set at age 23. This one-year lookback window was later extended to August 2021 because of the Covid restrictions. The provisions of the CVA allowed lawsuits for, or revival of, cases where the former statute of limitations had already expired. The CVA was intentionally designed to recognize that many survivors of childhood sexual abuse require decades to process the trauma and feel secure enough to come forward, often not reporting until well into adulthood.

 In 2024, Reuters staff writer Diana Novak Jones reported on a pair of lawsuits brought by more than 50 former Yeshiva University high school students who stated they had been sexually abused decades ago by teachers and staff while attending the school. The story made headlines because the New York Supreme Court Justice Alexandar Tisch rejected Yeshiva University’s motion to dismiss the two parallel lawsuits, “holding that a 2019 New York state law that lifted the statute of limitations on the claims is constitutional.” In supporting the plaintiff’s motion, Justice Tisch stated: “the plaintiffs had sufficiently alleged that the school failed to stop the abuse and failed to provide a safe environment for its students.” See “Sex abuse lawsuits against Yeshiva University can proceed, NY judge says,” April 3, 2024.
New York Supreme Court Justice Alexander Tisch on Tuesday rejected the school’s bid to dismiss the two parallel lawsuits, holding that a 2019 New York state law that lifted the statute of limitations on the claims is constitutional. Justice Tisch also said the plaintiffs had sufficiently alleged that the school failed to stop the abuse and failed to provide a safe environment for its students.”

Although the abuse spanned four decades from the 1950s through the 1980s, the lawsuits focused on a period starting in 1969. This was likely because earlier abuse victims were older and unable to withstand the rigors of litigation. 

 The sex scandal would entail financial reverberations pari passu with the unforgiving assault on its moral integrity. In a September 10, 2015 Jewish Telegraphic Agency report titled “Yeshiva University President Richard Joel to step down,” staff writer Uriel Heilman presented a sobering analysis of Yeshiva University’s financial reverses causing this once thriving institution (which had been known for its strong endowment) to descend into junk bond territory. He wrote: “At around the same time the sex scandal was making news, Moody’s downgraded Y.U.’s credit rating to B3, indicating a high credit risk, and warned that the school could run out of money before it had time to address its deep deficits. ‘The severity and long duration of Yeshiva’s operating deficits are primarily due to weak financial management and the board’s unwillingness or inability to act,’ ” said a Moody’s report in March 2014 that warned the university could run out of money in 2015. ‘Historically ineffective internal controls and limited transparency contributed to an inability to identify and correct problems.’ ” Many believed that a $380 million lawsuit filed in 2013 by former students of Yeshiva University High School for Boys, alleging decades of covered-up abuse exacerbated its financial instability. The mere threat of a massive payout, potential reputational damage, and the threat of future lawsuits worried credit analysts. In analyzing Yeshiva University’s financial reverses, Heilman pointed out: “[t]he first major public financial hit to the university came in 2008, when the Bernie Madoff Ponzi scheme caused significant losses to the Y.U. endowment and many of its major donors.” Given the immense pressure leading a university through such severe fiscal challenges, Heilman pointed out that “[i]n 2013 [Richard] Joel was paid $873,337 and earned an additional $397,973 in other compensation, according to the university’s public tax filings. In 2012, he was the 24th highest-paid university president in the country, according to The Chronicle of Higher Education.”  On a more sanguine note, Yeshiva University has taken significant, long-term steps to restructure its finances and debt to stabilize its bond credit rating, and by 2022-2026, S & P Global affirmed a ‘BBB’ -investment-grade rating with a stable outlook, reflecting improved financial management.

 Emily Davies, “ ‘It is with shame, and it should be’: Dozens sue Yeshiva University High School over alleged sexual abuse,” Washington Post, August 23, 2019; Sruli Friedman, “Nine Former MTA Students Settle Abuse Lawsuit; Counsel Hopes for More Settlements to Come,” The Commentator, September 20, 2024.

 Ariel Kaminer, Yeshiva University Chancellor Apologizes for Sexual Abuse Scandal,” New York Times, July 1, 2013. 

 Id.

 The first non-rabbinic president, who was a lawyer instead.

 Linda Stasi, “Secrets and Lies,” Harper’s Magazine, October 2019; Lauren Izso, “Untouchable – how the alleged Yeshiva University abusers escaped justice,” The Jerusalem Post, September 5, 2019.

 True, the second Holy Temple in Jerusalem was destroyed in 70AD because of “hatred without reason.” However, enmity, animus, and misanthropy even in the ancient days of Babylonia did not rise to the level of criminal assault of one Jew upon the other. Jew-on-Jew hate crimes are an artifact of post-Holocaust Orthodoxy.

 Amended Complaint, Index No. 950111/2019, p. 4.

 In fact, Helen Epstein’s seminal work, Children of the Holocaust (1979), was among the first to examine the intergenerational transmission of trauma, including how children internalized their parents’ justified bitterness toward the inaction of the outside world. Studies have noted that while many survivors focused on their own survival, their children often voice stronger accusations against the international community, addressing the missed opportunities for rescue. Research indicates that children of Holocaust survivors (the second generation) often grapple with intense feelings of injustice regarding the silence of the world, including American Jews, during the Holocaust. Many have directed their frustration at American Jewish leadership for not doing enough to save European Jews. Rabbi Stephen S. Wise has often been a target of reproach by American scholars, lawyers, and advocates, pointing out his shortcomings as a leader. In an interview with the International March of the Living, historian Rafael Medoff (founding director of the David S. Wyman Institute for Holocaust Studies in Washington, D.C., and author of The Jews Should Keep Quiet: Franklin Roosevelt, Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, and the Holocaust, Jewish Publication Society (JPS), September 1, 2019; and America and the Holocaust: A Documentary History, The Jewish Publication Society (JPS), 2022) showed how Rabbi Stephen Wise faced criticism from contemporary Jewish activists for being blind sighted by the Roosevelt administration, and far too eager to win favor with him at the extreme cost of saving the lives of European Jews. Supporting Roosevelt’s agenda of keeping Jews out of the United States, Wise is accused of having negated various rescue plans, and openly undermining militant activists, such as the Bergson Group, because he feared their loud protests would provoke antisemitism or embarrass the President. Writing in AJS Perspectives (the biannual magazine of the Association of Jewish Studies) Medoff showed how Wise denounced the 1943 Rabbis’ March on Washington as a “stunt.” Medoff opined that Wise was embarrassed by the “old-world” appearance of the Orthodox rabbis and worried the march would highlight FDR’s inaction.

 Mordechai I. Twersky, “Yeshiva U’s Centennial Ignores Abuse Survivors,” The Times of Israel, November 26, 2024.

 Mordechai I. Twersky, “What Jewish Philanthropy Owes Survivors: Stewardship’s Hard Questions,” The Times of Israel, January 28, 2026

 Mathilda Heller, “Lead plaintiff in Yeshiva University sexual abuse case accuses legal team of 'assault on dignity',” The Jerusalem Post, July 8, 2025. 

 Here is an example of how the plaintiff’s case against the perpetrators of sexual abuse has allegedly been undermined by the “protectors.” In court papers, reviewed the Jerusalem Post for their story (“Lead plaintiff in Yeshiva University sexual abuse case accuses legal team of ‘assault on dignity,’ ”), they pointed to charges by the plaintiffs that YU has engaged in witness tampering after a crucial witness – Rabbi Bloch – allegedly withdrew from his deposition after being contacted by university attorneys. They quoted Twersky: “The loss of his testimony, according to court documents, was both unexpected and irreversible.” The paper then said: “The court documents, viewed by the Post, claim YU’s lawyers ‘thwarted the deposition.’ ”


29
totals: total wc 8489;  main: 6128; 












  






































