Chapter 1.
MY MANIFESTO: I Shall Not Close My Eyes to What I
See, nor Hush My Voice to What I Speak
Introduction
I will not censor myself as a sociologist, writer, and Orthodox Jew for fear of
fomenting antisemitism, jeopardizing someone in power, or bringing shame
to iconic Orthodox institutions or to an entire community. I will not be
deterred by any of these specious conditions or hollow constraints. I will not
close my eyes to what I see, nor hush my voice to what I speak. I only ask of
the reader to do the same.
Whether you are an Orthodox Jew or secular Jew, a member of another faith,
or someone religiously unaffiliated, I urge you not to censor yourself either as
you pore over these pages. Instead, consider the impact on the victim,
allowing yourself to viscerally relate to the injustice of sexual assault and its
ensuing cover-up. And caution yourself not to raise common defenses, for
the latter is often a natural reaction to anything that erodes our confidence
in our prized institutions and religious leaders.
When I began to embark on this book project, choosing not to censor myself
would prove an arduous decision. Considering the freighted collective
memories of historical persecution of my people – and concomitant fears of
reigniting antisemitism – I spoke in earnest to my confidantes. Most, if not all,
advised me to exercise utmost restraint: to spare certain institutions and
individuals, who had already been exposed for their complicity in allowing
the abuse of innocents, from the kind of penetrating analysis and harsh
critique, which would be fundamental to a ratiocinative expository of this
kind. Likewise, they cautioned me not to dig “too deeply,” fearing that it
would expose opprobrious elements of the community, better left hidden in a
web of obscurity.
I would be disingenuous if I were to deny that their exhortations did not have
an influence on me. In response, I found myself making assurances to my
circle of colleagues and friends that I would “hold back.” Surely, these were
not vacuous promises, but veritable ones that I had truly intended to keep.
What I hadn’t realized was that contrary to this ideal picture of deference to
those both within my inner circle and within my wider orbit, I could not
escape the fact that the process of writing a book takes on a lifeforce of its
own – shifting inescapably from conscious control to subconscious flow.To draw an analogy here, the act of writing can be as laboriously self-
excavating as psychoanalysis, wherein barriers to introspection are
unsparingly stripped away so that core truths about one’s hidden motives,
drives, desires are allowed to emerge. Inasmuch as one cannot prevent
hidden feelings and emotions from coming to the fore in the psychoanalytic
process, similarly, when writing a book, one cannot filter, regulate, or
suppress the emergence of analytic findings. The truth emerging from close
analytic scrutiny of a subject can be suppressed no more easily than that
emerging from the rigorous study of one’ own psyche.
When “composition” and “truth” become inseparable partners in the
marriage of literary creation, it makes it impossible for the author to join “the
chorus of deniers.” Notably, when I rendered my assurances that I would
“censor” my punishing critique of sexual abuse in post-Holocaust Orthodoxy
– a decision that would have reduced this discussion to mere bromides and
excuses, best left abandoned in the alleys of palaver and pablum, simply to
satisfy those wishing to shield the citadels of power and prominent rabbis
from obloquy – it was before I had commenced the earnest writing of this
book.
Confessionally, this is not to say that the painstaking process of enucleating
the truths from a labyrinthine complex of human defenses and coverups has
been straightforward. Rather, it can be better described as an exercise in
wavering composition characterized by a constant vacillation between
concerns over someone I knew (or the institutions I admired) and the desire
to tell the truth. But, when I bridled my writing about the Orthodox
community’s horrid sex scandals in the schools, shuls (Hebrew for
synagogue), foster care agencies, sleepaway camps, and so forth, the cloudy
waters of prevarication and deceit drowned my work. The harrowing cries of
the victims, the quiets sobs of the innocent, and the weight of unspoken
sorrows began to haunt me with relentless force. It was then that I decided to
open the barn door and let the horses of Truth charge ahead, for fear that the
brewing scandal would implode someday in the community with dreadfully
infernal consequences.
However, I needed to be protected, at least temporarily, from the violent
tremor of my world turning upside down, until the truth resonated with me so
loudly that the veil was abruptly torn away. I understood at that moment
that the sheath of protection was actually blinding me to the realization that
those I had held in high esteem all of my life had now eviscerated the
(unmerited) trust I reposed in them. This pattern of denial would repeat itself
many times. On each occasion that I’d learn about abuse at a revered
institution, the familiar defense mechanism of denial would be reprised as Itried to protect myself from acknowledging that those I had once held in
veneration had now plunged into a culvert of disgrace.
I strengthened my mooring by realizing that the weight of the victims’
suffering far exceeded my own need to preserve the rosy images of the
institutions at the marrow of my existence. Viscerally feeling the extent of
injury to the victims and the malign actions of those who pillory them while
valorizing the offender, I was resolved to let the floodgates of scandal open
wide for all to see the rot within. But this is not to say that this decision was
without internal strife. Still, I ask rhetorically: if I were to selectively exclude
those illustrious clerics and religious institutions from punishing analysis,
would I be any different than those in the Orthodox community – or in any
religious community for that matter – who directly partake in, co-enable, or
orbit around such moral schisms?
At the Crossroads of My Dilemma – Choosing between my Loyalty to
Nostalgia and my Fidelity to Truth
One of the most defining moments at the crossroads of my dilemma came
when I had to reconcile my deep admiration for my 1970s religious studies
teacher, Rabbi Haskel Lookstein, with the revelation that he had ignored
complaints of sexual abuse. Rabbi Lookstein was my professor at Teachers
Institute for Women (a division of Stern College for Women and Yeshiva
University), and he also served as the principal at Ramaz, an exclusive
private Hebrew day school on Manhattan’s Upper East Side.
As a young person traversing uncharted terrain, I cleaved to those who were
able to serve as true mentors. And this rabbinic leader, had undoubtedly
exceeded my expectations. I recall how I looked forward with much alacrity
to going to Rabbi Lookstein’s Psalms class on Tuesday evenings in midtown
Manhattan. He had mastered the art of teaching, and it was evident he put in
due preparation for his class lectures. I remember how the students were
animated and engaged, as they fielded his thought-provoking questions.
What I recall most vividly about Rabbi Lookstein was how he masterfully
brought liturgy to life. Approaching the Book of Psalms with infectious
enthusiasm and joy, he bridged ancient text with modern life. In this
classroom we explored how the Book of Psalms encompasses with a large
net the intense range of human emotions from lament to joy, and how it
celebrates a just, kind, and equitable God who understands the depth of
human suffering. Learning of the quintessence of God, I found myself
miraculously transported to an empyreal, sublime place.Indeed, Rabbi Haskel Lookstein enjoyed an excellent reputation as one of the
finest teachers at Teachers Institute for Women, and he would bask in the
glow of his merited stature until an ugly scandal surfaced decades later at
the Ramaz day school, were he served as principal. My admiration for him
was so strong in fact that just a couple of years before the scandal at his elite
private day school would erupt, I had written a letter of praise about him,
which would be published in the Forward, a national publication for Jewish
intellectuals, which had started out in the late 19 th century as a Yiddish daily
but is now exclusively digital, reaching over 2 million unique monthly visitors
online.
My letter, titled “The Real Reason Rabbi Lookstein Retreated from the RNC,”
addressed a major news story about the rabbi having backed away from
giving the invocation at the Republican National Convention in 2016, after
having accepted a personal invitation from Donald Trump, whose nomination
was confirmed at the convention for his run in the upcoming November
election.
Lookstein’s retreat was prompted by a petition bearing 600 signatures of his
former Ramaz day school students, who were adamant about his not
delivering an invocation at the convention for they were vehemently
opposed to Trump’s views, referring to it as “Trumpism.” 1 They demanded
that he back down from delivering the opening prayer at the Republican
National Convention. Cowering to pressure, and not wanting to drive a
wedge between himself and his community, he retreated from giving the
invocation. In an email he shared with the press, he stated: “In the interest of
bringing our community together, I have asked to be relieved of my
commitment to deliver the invocation.” 2
This posed a particularly difficult quandary for the rabbi since Jared Kusher
(Trump’s son-in-law) and Ivanka Kushner, Trump’s daughter, were members
of Lookstein’s shul, Kehilath Jeshurun, on Manhattan’s Upper East Side.
Surely, the bonds were strong because Lookstein had supervised the
conversion of Trump’s daughter, Ivanka, to Judaism, which requires intense
one-on-one preparation – a sacred, arduous soul-searching process steeped
in the commitment to Jewish Law and to raising future children to be
1 In 2016, Modern Orthodox Jews were more or less solidly behind Hilary Clinton. A sea
change occurred by 2024 when most Modern Orthodox Jews had voted Trump into office. The
October 7 massacre and Israel’s counter-offensive, which has heavily criticized by
Democratic candidate Kamala Harris, was a major incentive to switch party loyalty among
the Modern Orthodox Jews, which followed the more religious Orthodox constituencies who
were staunchly supportive of Trump.
2 Jeremy W. Peters, “Ivanka Trump’s Rabbi Pulls Out of Appearing at Republican Convention,”
New York Times, July 15, 2016.staunchly proud members of the Jewish faith – over an extended period of
time.
Prompted to come the rabbi’s aid, I wrote in the Forward:
...I was privileged to study under Rabbi Haskel Lookstein when I
attended Teacher’s Institute back in the 70s. The man I knew then,
and the man I would encounter years later, was a person of dignity,
determination and fortitude....Though I am deeply saddened that Rabbi
Lookstein will not be giving the invocation at the RNC, I can say that I
truly understand the man: it was not weakness or cowardice that
forced him to retreat, but a deep respect for his role as a teacher,
educator, and beacon of light for all us in the Jewish community. 3
Two years later, the scandal would break in the secular and religious media,
that for me ignited a maelstrom of cacophonous currents – nostalgia versus
truth – that were painful to bear. I had to reconcile two incongruent images:
one of virtue and the other of moral failing. More importantly, as a member
of the Orthodox community, I witnessed how these occurrences – one
scandal erupting after another – were no longer anomalies. They were
becoming rather commonplace, especially after the 2019 passage of the
Crime Victims Act in the state of New York. 4
From these phenomenologically lived experiences of moral incongruity –
between my ideal image of clerical figures and their disappointingly
reprehensible actions – was born the archetypal framework of moral schisms
to which I devote this elucubration.
Shielding Yeshiva University: Reconciling the Long-Ago Promise I made to my
Late Father with the Revelation of a Shocking Sex Scandal at his Cherished
Alma Mater where Children of Holocaust Survivors were Deliberately
Targeted by Predators on the Faculty, Administration, and in the Dormitories
As a researcher and as a member of the Orthodox Jewish population, I found
many of the sex scandals at religious institutions profoundly disturbing. One
3 Amy Neustein, “The Real Reason Rabbi Lookstein Retreated From the RNC,” Letter to the
Editor, the Forward, July 19, 2016.
4 Give definition of lookback and change of age of first filing a claim – cite NYT or another
authoritative paper. Jewish Telegraphic Agency (JTA) reporters Asaf Shalev and Ella Rockart
wrote a blistering expose titled “NY Jewish Institutions hit with 150 child sex abuse lawsuits
since 2019.” The story was picked up by The Times of Israel, August 30, 2021; “At least 150
sex abuse lawsuits filed against NY Jewish Institutions,” Jerusalem Post, Augst 31, 2021. Most
notably, certain institutions were hit with multiple lawsuits, such as Yeshiva University and
the Ohel Children’s Home and Family Services, a prominent foster care agency in Brooklyn.
Give TOI citation from September 2021, and give a citation from NYT regarding Yeshiva
University.institution, in particular, caught in the web of infamy after scathing reports in
the press of decades-long sexual abuse and sodomy, particularly targeting
children of Holocaust survivors, 5 represented a visceral, demoralizing rupture
for me. It was my late father’s beloved alma mater: Yeshiva University. On
the dining room wall of my childhood home in Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn,
hung a glistening plaque dedicated to my father from Rabbi Norman Lamm,
Yeshiva University’s president, who would later become chancellor. Engraved
on the laminated wood was Rabbi Lamm’s expression of sincere gratitude to
my father, a distinguished rabbi, educator, and scholar, 6 for his unwavering
support of Yeshiva University – the institution that had conferred ordination
upon him in 1940.
My father, Rabbi Dr. Abraham Neustein, was well-known to Rabbi Lamm
because of his unusual stature in the rabbinic world. He served as chief rabbi
of the Jewish Center of Brighton Beach – the largest Modern Orthodox Jewish
congregation in Brooklyn at the time – for sixty-two years until his death in
2002. My father’s synagogue, a 1930 four-story Renaissance Revival
trapezoidal structure clad in gold-colored stone with a prominent grand
staircase leading to a second-story loggia, would eventually earn a spot on
the National Registry of Historic Places and even catch the eye of Hollywood,
serving as a set for Nicolas Cage in Lord of War. 7 During his tenure at the
synagogue, he served as the first principal of Flatbush Yeshiva High School.
Growing up in a home of a prominent rabbi, I became painfully attuned to –
and perhaps somewhat obsessed with – the rigorous standards of
comportment expected of me. I obliged. However, I do recall those liminal
moments when my personal beliefs appeared headed for a collision with the
rabbinate’s (Jewish clerical body) established posture, stance, and political
5 Amended Complaint, Index No. 950111/2019, p. 4.
6 who was posthumously bestowed the “Talmud Chacham Ha’dor Award” (Hebrew for
Talmudic Sage of his Generation Ponenvizt yeshiva, give cite from my eulogy in JP and the
write up in Yated Ne’eman
7 Noah Sheidlower, “Top Ten Secrets of Brighton Beach, Brooklyn,” untapped new york
(Digital Magazine), December 7, 2021. See Wikipedia page: Jewish Center of Brighton Beach
- Wikipedia. My father’s synagogue would achieve fame in another regard. In 2013, Village
Voice reporter Albert Samaha (now at The Washington Post) wrote an exposé on extortionist
tactics of Mendel Epstein, a Brooklyn rabbi, pretending to help women get a Jewish divorce,
whose crimes of extortion, kidnapping, and extreme torture landed him in federal prison.
See “Bad Rabbi: Tales of Extortion and Torture Depict a Divorce Broker’s Brutal Grip on the
Orthodox Community,” Village Voice, December 4, 2013. My father was portrayed in that
article for his courageous efforts to help divorced women, many of whom nearly fell prey to
the extortionist practices of Epstein. The Voice reported: “Rabbi Neustein ran a sort of
Underground Railroad for abused women in the community.... So two or three times a week,
Neustein’s father drove the women to the Jewish Center’s bais medrash, the prayer room
where he taught, and they told her their stories: of domestic violence, of crumbling
marriages, of get refusals.” It was in this same room, the bais medrash of my father’s
synagogue (in addition to the main sanctuary) where Nicolas Cage starred in the 2005 crime
drama film Lord of War.disposition. Thankfully, this was not widespread, but rather narrowly focused
on my child advocacy position, since I was zealously committed to protecting
Jewish (and non-Jewish) children from the perils of abuse and could not be
persuaded to back away.
That moment of collision between my views and those of the rabbinate had
cast its shadow across my path in the fall of 1990. I had just returned home
from appearing on a live television show aired on New York’s WWOR TV,
Channel 9, referred to back then as a “superstation” since their coverage
was broadcast beyond the geographic New York area via cable and c-band
satellite to subscribers across the United States. I found myself suddenly in
the spotlight, navigating a media frenzy prompted by my decision to speak
about a taboo subject: child abuse in the Orthodox world. A heartbreaking
story in Brooklyn’s ultra-Orthodox Hasidic community of Boro Park had
recently erupted in the press and I felt compelled to act. The story involved
eight-year-old Yaakov Riegler, a severely mentally challenged boy, who was
killed on Yom Kippur (Day of Atonement) by his mother who repeatedly
stabbed him with a knife, beat him, and twisted his leg so viciously that she
heard the thigh bone crack. 8
Boro Park was aflutter as it faced its first high-profile filicide case to attract
widespread national coverage. Reverberations were felt in Orthodox
communities outside of New York and around the country as the idealized
image of strong, stable family life was contradicted by the violent death of
this child. New York Newsday investigative reporter Clara Hemphill, who
served as the lead journalist on the Yaakov Riegler story, would share with
her team of reporters a 1991 Pulitzer Prize for Local Reporting. She
interviewed me at length and quoted me in her story. 9 I urged her to do a
follow up focusing on the foster care agency, Ohel Children’s Home and
Family Services (a/k/a “Ohel”), which had failed miserably to protect the boy
despite their overseeing the family for the past five years.
8 Celia W. Dugger, “As Mother Killed Her Son, Protectors Observed Privacy,” New York Times,
February 10, 1992, pg. 1, B10. Interestingly, the mother was not identified in the
newspapers as “psychotic.” There were reports by neighbors of domestic violence. The
spacing of the children were so close in age that the mother had no time to heal between
pregnancies. And at the time she killed her son, she was having a very difficult pregnancy
and had a bruised leg and was limping, possibly from domestic abuse. The father was
described in the press as “slow” and the family lived at or below the poverty line. There was
little hope for improvement because in ultra-Orthodox communities the common deprivation
of secular education precludes a woman from earning an income sufficient to leave a
marriage plagued by strife. Besides, divorce is severely looked down upon and carries a
social stigma rendering a divorced woman in such circles a pariah. Sadly, under pressure to
preserve the community’s image of a stable homelife, battered women in religious
communities may implode – and their children become the casualties.
9 Clara Hemphill, “A Tradition of Silence Hides Family Violence,” by Clara Hemphill, New York
Newsday, November 19, 1990, pp. 2, 35.In her follow-up story, Hemphill quoted a professor at Columbia University’s
School of Social Work who chastised Ohel for their flagrant violation of the
mandated reporting statutes in failing to call the State Central Registry (a
state hotline for reporting abuse within the home) after receiving reports
from neighbors that they “heard a woman’s blood-curdling screams coming
from the Riegler house at night.” 10 Interviewing several government and
private industry sources, Hemphill reported that “child welfare experts were
astonished by the blunder,” referring to Ohel’s failure to call the State
Central Registry to report abuse. 11
When I returned from my interview on the superstation, my father, known for
his composure and aplomb, seemed visibly upset. I hadn’t realized it, but my
appearance on television that morning had triggered a barrage of calls to my
father from his rabbinic colleagues shaken by my frank discussion of child
abuse in the Orthodox community. Speaking out as a pioneering voice about
the disquieting undercurrents within the Orthodox community – with Yaakov
Riegler’s tragic death highlighting the fragile family bonds usually kept
hidden – I undoubtedly stirred angst in the rabbinic leaders. 12 Pointing to his
plaque from Yeshiva University, crowded among a sea of others on the wall
(he had earned four post-graduate degrees and had received many honors),
he intoned: “Keep Yeshiva University out of your public discussions on child
abuse in the Orthodox community.”
I found my father’s admonition in 1990 chilling, though, at the time, I didn’t
have the slightest inkling that abuse might be occurring at Yeshiva
University, and I certainly had no intention of bringing the school into public
discourse. In fact, it wasn’t until 2012 – ten years after my father had passed
away peacefully at age 89 – that I would learn that his esteemed alma mater
had been embroiled in scandal. However, back in 1990, as I began my foray
into public discussion of the dangers of child abuse, both physical and
sexual, Yeshiva University was in the distant, obscure corners of my
consciousness. Under those conditions, it was easy to promise my father I
would spare his school from reproach; there was no compelling need to
expose it anyway.
The struggle between the promise to my late father and the stark reality of
the horrid sex abuse scandal at Yeshiva University hadn’t emerged until 2012
10 Clara Hemphill, “The Agony of Yacov Riegler: Bureaucracy fails to save Brooklyn boy,”
New York Newsday,
December 16, 1990, pp. 6, 22-23. (quote from page 23).
11 Id.
12 In fact, a congregant at my father’s synagogue, who was visiting his relative in Mill Basin
for the Sabbath, came back to report to my father that the Rabbi of the Flatbush Park Jewish
Center, David S. Halpern (now deceased), injected my name into the Sabbath sermon,
warning his parishioners to “immediately turn off” their television set if they should see me
on the air discussing child abuse in the Orthodox community.when the school was first exposed in the press for victimizing high school
boys from the 1950s to the 1980s, particularly (though not exclusively) those
from Holocaust survivor homes. 13 Truthfully, seeing Yeshiva University’s
name sullied came like a thunderbolt. I was dumfounded, as were my
colleagues, by the revelations of the abuse survivors – and by the shocking
realization that no one cared to stop the charging horses of destruction. I
kept asking myself: “How could those in charge turn a blind eye to such
heinous acts of abuse?”
What made the revelations even more difficult to digest was that the school
had an unrivaled reputation. Recognized as the flagship university of Modern
Orthodoxy – the zenith of academic excellence – with a curriculum spanning
from high school to postgraduate, it was the coveted school of every
Orthodox parent. As an iconic structure in Washington Heights, renowned for
its commanding position on a high point in upper Manhattan and for its
unique eclectic architecture that serves as a physical embodiment of its
mission to combine Jewish tradition with modern culture, the school would
bask in the glory of its stellar academic reputation and architectural
grandeur – and for decades this premier institution had appeared
impregnable, yet all the while, students were being abused in the dormitories
and elsewhere.
The school’s celebrity-like ambiance could be demonstrably seen at critical
inflection points. For instance, in 1973, former Israeli Prime Minister Golda
Meier gave an address at Yeshiva University at the majestic Nathan Lamport
Auditorium (located inside Zysman Hall on the Wilf Campus in Washington
Heights) known for its Art Deco and Moorish-gothic revival style. The 1,000
seats were filled to capacity, leaving students crammed in the aisles,
practically one on top of another, straining to get a glimpse of the former
prime minister. After she spoke, Yeshiva University presented Golda Meier
with an honorary degree, and her acceptance was met with a massive
standing ovation. Her visit to such an illustrious school would be the
capstone of her notable trip to the United States.
Furthermore, their faculty choices epitomize their preeminent standing in the
academic world. To wit, their rabbinic program, known as RIETS (Rabbi Issac
Elchanan Theological Seminary), would be later be named “The Rabbi Joseph
B. Soloveitchik Semikha Program,” after Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik – a
towering figure on the faculty of Yeshiva University for over 40 years, where
he taught Talmud and Jewish philosophy to generations of rabbinic students
from the 1940s to the 1980s. Rabbi Soloveitchik’s reputation resonated
throughout Modern Orthodoxy. Earning his doctorate in philosophy, with a
focus on neo-Kantianism and a dissertation on Hermann Cohen, from the
13 Give citations to articlesUniversity of Berlin (also known as Friedrich Wilhelm University, now
Humboldt University), he fused Talmudic analysis with modern existential
philosophy. He was considered one of the most brilliant Talmudic analysts
and religious philosophers of the 20 th century.
Cast as a distinguished, elite, and academically rigorous institution– a
prestigious, top-tier pure pedigree fixture of American Jewish educational life
– Yeshiva University would be rocked by a December 2012 bombshell
investigative report in The Forward detailing sexual assault and sodomy
committed at their high school’s Washington Heights campus. The abused
students pointed to a former Talmud teacher, Rabbi Macy Gordon, and a
former principal Rabbi George Finkelstein, wherein the former (not the latter)
had committed repeated acts of sodomy in addition to sexual abuse. Seven
months later (July 2013), 19 former students (which would subsequently
increase to 38 ex-students after the passage of the Child Victims Act in
2019, 14 and later to over 50 15 ) would file a $380 million federal lawsuit in
14 Passed in January 2019 and signed into law on February 14, 2019, New York’s Child
Victims Act (CVA) was a defining piece of legislation that ended decades of impunity for
perpetrators. The reason is that it fundamentally changed legal recourse for incest and child
sexual abuse survivors by significantly extending the statute of limitations for civil lawsuits.
Specifically, the CVA (Senate Bill S2440) enacted the following changes: 1. Civil lawsuits for
child sexual abuse can now be filed until the survivor turns 55, as opposed to age 23 which
had been the cutoff point for filing a civil action under the prior statute of limitations. (Under
the CVA, the statute of limitations was extended five years from age 23 to age 28 for felony
criminal cases.) 2. The 2019 law initially opened a one-year lookback window (from August
14, 2019 to August 14, 2020) for anyone whose lawsuit claim had been summarily dismissed
because of the previous statute of limitations which had been set at age 23. This one-year
lookback window was later extended to August 2021 because of the Covid restrictions. The
provisions of the CVA allowed lawsuits for, or revival of, cases where the former statute of
limitations had already expired. The CVA was intentionally designed to recognize that many
survivors of childhood sexual abuse require decades to process the trauma and feel secure
enough to come forward, often not reporting until well into adulthood.
15 In 2024, Reuters staff writer Diana Novak Jones reported on a pair of lawsuits brought by
more than 50 former Yeshiva University high school students who stated they had been
sexually abused decades ago by teachers and staff while attending the school. The story
made headlines because the New York Supreme Court Justice Alexandar Tisch rejected
Yeshiva University’s motion to dismiss the two parallel lawsuits, “holding that a 2019 New
York state law that lifted the statute of limitations on the claims is constitutional.” In
supporting the plaintiff’s motion, Justice Tisch stated: “the plaintiffs had sufficiently alleged
that the school failed to stop the abuse and failed to provide a safe environment for its
students.” See “Sex abuse lawsuits against Yeshiva University can proceed, NY judge says,”
April 3, 2024.
New York Supreme Court Justice Alexander Tisch on Tuesday rejected the school’s bid to
dismiss the two parallel lawsuits, holding that a 2019 New York state law that lifted the
statute of limitations on the claims is constitutional. Justice Tisch also said the plaintiffs had
sufficiently alleged that the school failed to stop the abuse and failed to provide a safe
environment for its students.”White Plains, New York, accusing the university of covering up the abuse that
occurred between 1969 and 1989. 16
With the revelations in The Forward, Yeshiva University would now be
refracted through a prism of punishing reality: their once impeccable, pristine
reputation was destined to be tarnished by the scandal that darkened their
doorstep. 17 The school’s chancellor, Rabbi Norman Lamm (now deceased),
who signed the plaque that adorned my parents’ dining room wall, would
now be called into question, asked to account for having ignored the pleas of
dozens of high school age boys sodomized and abused by faculty,
administrators, and other employees over three to four decades. 18
Just seven days before the lawsuit was filed, Rabbi Lamm issued an
emotional six-page resignation letter announcing his retirement after 60
years at Yeshiva University. New York Times reporter Ariel Kaminer, quoting
from the chancellor’s July 1, 2013 letter (appearing on Yeshiva University’s
website) pointed to Lamm’s concessions: “At the time that inappropriate
16Although the abuse spanned four decades from the 1950s through the 1980s, the lawsuits
focused on a period starting in 1969. This was likely because earlier abuse victims were
older and unable to withstand the rigors of litigation.
17 The sex scandal would entail financial reverberations pari passu with the unforgiving
assault on its moral integrity. In a September 10, 2015 Jewish Telegraphic Agency report
titled “Yeshiva University President Richard Joel to step down,” staff writer Uriel Heilman
presented a sobering analysis of Yeshiva University’s financial reverses causing this once
thriving institution (which had been known for its strong endowment) to descend into junk
bond territory. He wrote: “At around the same time the sex scandal was making news,
Moody’s downgraded Y.U.’s credit rating to B3, indicating a high credit risk, and warned that
the school could run out of money before it had time to address its deep deficits. ‘The
severity and long duration of Yeshiva’s operating deficits are primarily due to weak financial
management and the board’s unwillingness or inability to act,’ ” said a Moody’s report in
March 2014 that warned the university could run out of money in 2015. ‘Historically
ineffective internal controls and limited transparency contributed to an inability to identify
and correct problems.’ ” Many believed that a $380 million lawsuit filed in 2013 by former
students of Yeshiva University High School for Boys, alleging decades of covered-up abuse
exacerbated its financial instability. The mere threat of a massive payout, potential
reputational damage, and the threat of future lawsuits worried credit analysts. In analyzing
Yeshiva University’s financial reverses, Heilman pointed out: “[t]he first major public
financial hit to the university came in 2008, when the Bernie Madoff Ponzi scheme caused
significant losses to the Y.U. endowment and many of its major donors.” Given the immense
pressure leading a university through such severe fiscal challenges, Heilman pointed out
that “[i]n 2013 [Richard] Joel was paid $873,337 and earned an additional $397,973 in other
compensation, according to the university’s public tax filings. In 2012, he was the 24th
highest-paid university president in the country, according to The Chronicle of Higher
Education.” On a more sanguine note, Yeshiva University has taken significant, long-term
steps to restructure its finances and debt to stabilize its bond credit rating, and by 2022-
2026, S & P Global affirmed a ‘BBB’ -investment-grade rating with a stable outlook,
reflecting improved financial management.
18 Emily Davies, “ ‘It is with shame, and it should be’: Dozens sue Yeshiva University High
School over alleged sexual abuse,” Washington Post, August 23, 2019; Sruli Friedman, “Nine
Former MTA Students Settle Abuse Lawsuit; Counsel Hopes for More Settlements to Come,”
The Commentator, September 20, 2024.actions by individuals at Yeshiva were brought to my attention, I acted in a
way that I thought was correct, but which now seems ill conceived.... I now
recognize that I was wrong.” 19 His letter of apology was dressed in religious
terms: he framed his mea maxima culpa (“through my most grievous fault”)
as the impetus to do “teshuvah,” Hebrew for the act of repenting. 20
Following the chancellor’s resignation, Richard M. Joel, Yeshiva University’s
school president, 21 would address a report from Manhattan’s white shoe law
firm Sullivan and Cromwell, which had been commissioned by the school to
look into the abuse allegations in response to The Forward’s explosive story
in December 2012:
Earlier today, Sullivan & Cromwell LLP released its report marking the
completion of the firm’s eight-month investigation into allegations of
past abuse at Yeshiva University High School for Boys. There are
findings set forth in this report that serve as a source of profound
shame and sadness for our institution. On behalf of the Board of
Trustees and the entire University community, I express my deepest
and most heartfelt remorse, and truly hope that our recognition of
these issues provides some level of comfort and closure to the victims.
Although we cannot change the past, we remain committed to making
confidential counseling services available to those individual victims in
the hope they can achieve a more peaceful future. It is with them in
mind that we move forward in continuing our efforts to lead our
community away from a culture of apathy regarding issues of abuse
and toward one of action, change and growth.... Sullivan & Cromwell’s
investigation and report serve as an important reminder to learn from
the past and take responsibility for our future. We must fulfill our
mandate to model the finest moral and ethical behavior for the many
who look to Yeshiva University to lead, and to serve as a source of light
unto the world. We currently find ourselves on the eve of the Yamim
Noraim, our High Holiday season. Our tradition describes that on Yom
Kippur, Moses descended from Mt. Sinai with the second set of luchot,
the Ten Commandments. These tablets differed from the first in that
they were written by God and yet fashioned by Moses. In other words,
they represented a true partnership between man and the
Transcendent, between humanity and the Creator, in ensuring integrity
and goodness on this earth. In the season of introspection, we must
19 Ariel Kaminer, Yeshiva University Chancellor Apologizes for Sexual Abuse Scandal,” New
York Times, July 1, 2013.
20 Id.
21 The first non-rabbinic president, who was a lawyer instead.fortify that relationship by recommitting to the ongoing work of
creation. If our future is to align with the ethical and personal
imperatives of our sacred Torah, then we must not wait – we must
make it so, not merely in word but in action. This is our duty. This is
what we teach our children. This is what we must remind each other as
a community of aspiration. God willing, Yeshiva University and
communities everywhere will persevere with an unwavering
commitment to protect our children as they themselves develop into
the stewards of tomorrow (August 26, 2013).
Good-faith attempts to burnish Yeshiva University’s name with a self-
commissioned report from a prominent New York City law firm, still doesn’t
negate the fact that several victims attempted suicide on multiple occasions:
many suffered long-term trauma, chronic depression, intrusive thoughts, and
flashbacks. 22
Most distressing is that the sex abuse scandal at Yeshiva University
instantiated a new sociological phenomenon within post-Holocaust
Orthodoxy: Jew-on-Jew hate crime, which had been hitherto unseen in
American Jewry or in European shtetls (Yiddish for little towns). 23 A few lines
from the lawsuit are enough to chillingly illustrate the sheer indignation of
such hate crimes:
Rabbi George Finkelstein (promoted to principal) “specifically targeted
vulnerable boys for physical and sexual abuse...prey[ing] upon children of
Holocaust survivors.” He “implored these children to not add insult to their
parents’ suffering by telling them about his assaults.” 24
By weaponizing the trauma of his victims’ parents, the perpetrator
manipulatively ensured his victims’ silence: he imposed a special onus of
guilt on the adolescent boys he abused, by warning them that reporting his
crimes to their parents would further devastate persons of a generation
already shattered by the trauma of World War II. Such execrable,
reprehensible, and unforgiveable behavior reflects the impact of the
Holocaust as a watershed in the cataclysm of modern Jewish history.
“Intra-group” hate crimes, defined as violence taking place within a single
group, have emerged in post-Holocaust societies, representing a distinct
22 Linda Stasi, “Secrets and Lies,” Harper’s Magazine, October 2019; Lauren Izso,
“Untouchable – how the alleged Yeshiva University abusers escaped justice,” The Jerusalem
Post, September 5, 2019.
23 True, the second Holy Temple in Jerusalem was destroyed in 70AD because of “hatred
without reason.” However, enmity, animus, and misanthropy even in the ancient days of
Babylonia did not rise to the level of criminal assault of one Jew upon the other. Jew-on-Jew
hate crimes are an artifact of post-Holocaust Orthodoxy.
24 Amended Complaint, Index No. 950111/2019, p. 4.form of violence from “inter-group” antagonism, such as antisemitism.
Sowing the seeds of divisiveness, deviant behavior, as seen among the
Yeshiva University perpetrators of sex crimes against their students,
highlights the hurdles of social integration of American descendants with
their European counterparts. Although time has arguably been a mitigating
factor, the wounds of betrayal of the Holocaust survivors by their American
brethren have not receded into the safe cubbies of the past; in fact, many
have observed that the children of Holocaust survivors are the first to
confront the failures of American Jewish leaders during the war, as their
parents were too busy surviving upon arrival in American to reflect of these
issues. 25
Veteran journalist, essayist, and social activist Mordechai I. Twersky, a
Yeshiva University sex abuse survivor – just one among more than 50 high
school students who were savagely preyed upon by members of the faculty
and the administration – wrote on his November 2024 Times of Israel blog
shortly before the school held its Centennial Hanukkah Dinner:
“As Yeshiva University (YU) approaches its 100 th annual Hanukkah
Dinner...a celebration of its storied history and accomplishments, there
remains an unspoken shadow over the institution’s legacy. For many
survivors of sexual abuse, including myself, this milestone is not a
cause for celebration but a stark reminder of decades of silence,
25 In fact, Helen Epstein’s seminal work, Children of the Holocaust (1979), was among the
first to examine the intergenerational transmission of trauma, including how children
internalized their parents’ justified bitterness toward the inaction of the outside world.
Studies have noted that while many survivors focused on their own survival, their children
often voice stronger accusations against the international community, addressing the
missed opportunities for rescue. Research indicates that children of Holocaust survivors (the
second generation) often grapple with intense feelings of injustice regarding the silence of
the world, including American Jews, during the Holocaust. Many have directed their
frustration at American Jewish leadership for not doing enough to save European Jews. Rabbi
Stephen S. Wise has often been a target of reproach by American scholars, lawyers, and
advocates, pointing out his shortcomings as a leader. In an interview with the International
March of the Living, historian Rafael Medoff (founding director of the David S. Wyman
Institute for Holocaust Studies in Washington, D.C., and author of The Jews Should Keep
Quiet: Franklin Roosevelt, Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, and the Holocaust, Jewish Publication
Society (JPS), September 1, 2019; and America and the Holocaust: A Documentary History,
The Jewish Publication Society (JPS), 2022) showed how Rabbi Stephen Wise faced criticism
from contemporary Jewish activists for being blind sighted by the Roosevelt administration,
and far too eager to win favor with him at the extreme cost of saving the lives of European
Jews. Supporting Roosevelt’s agenda of keeping Jews out of the United States, Wise is
accused of having negated various rescue plans, and openly undermining militant activists,
such as the Bergson Group, because he feared their loud protests would provoke
antisemitism or embarrass the President. Writing in AJS Perspectives (the biannual magazine
of the Association of Jewish Studies) Medoff showed how Wise denounced the 1943 Rabbis’
March on Washington as a “stunt.” Medoff opined that Wise was embarrassed by the “old-
world” appearance of the Orthodox rabbis and worried the march would highlight FDR’s
inaction.evasion, and denial of justice.... Nearly 50 years later, survivors live
alone in darkness – marginalized and abandoned by the institution that
failed them.” 26
More recently, Twersky addressed the issue of why philanthropists must
consider the conduct of an institution they support and assert fiduciary
responsibility. In the wake of Yeshiva University’s attempt to dismiss the
plaintiff’s suit so as to evade its responsibility to restitute victims, he wrote:
“Whatever one believes about the underlying facts, such legal postures
inevitably raise questions about institutional priorities – and about
what messages philanthropic support may unintentionally convey while
those [sex abuse] issues remain unsettled.... Philanthropy often acts in
good faith, responding to urgent communal needs. But good intentions
do not eliminate fiduciary responsibility. Dollars do more than fund
programs. They signal values. They shape incentives. They teach
lessons about what conduct carries consequences – and what conduct
does not.” 27
Stirred by Twersky’s appeals, I am reminded of a verse in Scripture that has
always resonated with me – and is especially relevant to My Manifesto. In
the Book of Psalms (85:11 – KJV; 85:12—Hebrew) it states:
Truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down
from heaven
Emet me’eretz tizmach, v’tzedek mishamayim nishkaf
In rendering an interpretation of this verse in scripture, Talmudic Sages have
pointed to the contrast between the first part (“Truth shall spring out of the
earth”) and the second part (“Righteousness shall look down from heaven”).
Whereas, Righteousness (“Heavenly”) represents the Divine – the
quintessence, the embodiment of perfection, in other words, the true,
objective standard – Truth (“Earthly”) represents the lived experience,
fidelity, and reliability of human beings.
This verse from Scripture has resonated in both the Christian and Jewish
religions over many centuries. It has been examined for its tropological sense
– a Christian method of biblical interpretation focusing on how scriptural
texts apply to an individual’s moral life and actions – as part of an exegetical
analysis. In comparison to the Western tradition, when exegesis is
performed in accordance with Jewish hermeneutics, the “Drash” or Derash
26 Mordechai I. Twersky, “Yeshiva U’s Centennial Ignores Abuse Survivors,” The Times of
Israel, November 26, 2024.
27 Mordechai I. Twersky, “What Jewish Philanthropy Owes Survivors: Stewardship’s Hard
Questions,” The Times of Israel, January 28, 2026(Midrash) – a homiletical or moral interpretation that digs deeply into the text
to find ethical, legal and spiritual lessons corresponding to the tropological
(moral) sense – the goal is to find practical, ethical, and moral application of
the text (“Drash” or “Musar” – Hebrew for the study of ethics) that is
specifically focused on the collective, legal, and ethical obligations of the
community writ large.
Rabbinic sages deduced from this verse in Psalms – “Truth shall spring out of
the earth, and righteousness shall look down from heaven” – that while
absolute righteousness comes from God, humanity must generate "truth" (or
faithfulness) through action. So, what this suggests is that if humans live
with integrity and keep their word, they are "sprouting" truth from the
earth. I bring the reader’s attention to the order of this verse: The first part is
for man – to till the soil in earnest – which serves as a condition precedent for
the second part: God’s looking down on earth, where man is then
bequeathed with the blessings of the Divine. If the verse had been written in
the reverse order, man would first need to wait for God to look down upon
him before taking action to sift through the chaos and mayhem to create an
orderly world.
Mordechai Twersky, by taking such courageous pro-active steps in seeking
justice for over 50 Yeshiva University students, has effectively embodied this
biblical teaching. Even more, Twersky’s actions illustrate the Talmudic
interpretation of this verse: truth cannot remain solely in heaven as an
abstract ideal – airy, empyreal, sublime. Referred to in Western religions as
the “Psalm of Return,” or as a prayer of restoration, where human
faithfulness (truth) rises from the earth while divine righteousness looks
down from heaven to bless the land, all of the efforts of Twersky to right the
wrongs at Yeshiva University which inflicted untold suffering on victims to
this very day show that truth sprouts from the ground.
I ask: “Why is the ‘grassroots’ metaphor used to describe local activism?”
The answer is found in scripture. That is, truth must be cultivated, refined,
nurtured on earth like vegetation in a garden – and as the province of man
(not God), it sprouts in a messy pot of soil, representing the highly imperfect,
chaotic, and muddled nature of human life. Furthermore, in Zohar, Bereshit
(21:237) – a foundational text of Jewish mysticism (Kabbalah) focusing on
understanding the nature of God, the origins of the universe, and the soul’s
relationship to the Divine – it says “And it cast down the truth to the ground.”
Derived from the Book of Daniel (8:12), it refers to a metaphysical moment
during creation when God cast the divine attribute of Truth down to earth to
allow for the existence of humanity. Given that truth is rooted in the ground, I
ask, “is it not a coincidence that most, if not all, social justice reforms have
evolved from hard-earned ‘grassroots’ activism?”Beyond a doubt, Mordechai Twersky has been actively tilling the soil of social
reform, having emerged as the champion of child safety and as the sentinel
of the innocent. His Sisyphean 14-year legal battle against Yeshiva University
has been underscored by the defendant’s strategic delays and tactics that
have been demoralizing, yet he has persevered, demonstrating a strength
that can only be described as divinely inspired. For example, in 2025, the
Jerusalem Post ran a feature story titled “Lead plaintiff in Yeshiva University
sexual abuse case accuses legal team of 'assault on dignity' ”. In recounting
the onerous demands made by Yeshiva’s lawyers of the victims – to supply
marital counseling records, mental health reports, registration on online
dating websites, and even personal mental health records of the plaintiffs’
parents – Twersky cried out: “It’s a vulgar and obscene attempt to wrap the
trauma of childhood sexual abuse victims around the marriages and private
struggles of our Holocaust survivor parents, rather than accept responsibility
for betraying those parents and failing to protect us.” 28
In the last analysis, as news reports of the graphic acts of sexual violence
and sodomy began to reach a wider audience – through coverage in the New
York Times and in Harper’s – a dastardly damning picture began to emerge:
one of sinister motives behind the abuse of the Yeshiva University high
school students, regrettably aided by an inattentive, phlegmatic
administration. Fortunately, the 50 plus Yeshiva University graduates, though
brutalized by faculty and staff, have refused to be siloed within the corridors
of oblivion. What’s more, despite the perpetrators’ – and their protectors’ 29 –
desire to see them dissolve into a shadowy gray expanse, their voices
remain.
As I harken back to the unnerving conversation with my late father back in
1990 – occurring just after I spoke on live television regarding the tragic
killing of Yaakov Riegler by his Hasidic mother on Yom Kippur – I wonder if
Yeshiva University had been among the torrent of callers reproving me for
speaking out on child
28 Mathilda Heller, “Lead plaintiff in Yeshiva University sexual abuse case accuses legal
team of 'assault on dignity',” The Jerusalem Post, July 8, 2025.
29 Here is an example of how the plaintiff’s case against the perpetrators of sexual abuse
has allegedly been undermined by the “protectors.” In court papers, reviewed the Jerusalem
Post for their story (“Lead plaintiff in Yeshiva University sexual abuse case accuses legal
team of ‘assault on dignity,’ ”), they pointed to charges by the plaintiffs that YU has engaged
in witness tampering after a crucial witness – Rabbi Bloch – allegedly withdrew from his
deposition after being contacted by university attorneys. They quoted Twersky: “The loss of
his testimony, according to court documents, was both unexpected and irreversible.” The
paper then said: “The court documents, viewed by the Post, claim YU’s lawyers ‘thwarted
the deposition.’ ”abuse within the community? Back then, the boys, traumatized from acts of
sodomy and sexual abuse, were too young to expose the horrid scandal. But
the school certainly knew; they admitted years later to having been “wrong”
in the way they handled the complaints of sexual violence brought to their
attention at the time. And they may have shuddered at the thought that I’d
expose them.
In the face of such deep-rooted abuse, I have no choice but to break the
promise I made to my late father so many decades ago and to disregard his
final warning: “Keep Yeshiva University out of your public discussions on child
abuse in the Orthodox community.” For the sake of the vulnerable children,
I’m afraid I can no longer keep that silence.
